Introduction
============

Apoptosis is a form of programmed cell death that is a critical element of
normal physiology and disease (?). Cell death can be triggered following the
detection of cellular stress by the so-called "instrinsic" pathway, or by the
binding of ligands to death receptors in the process of extrinsic apoptosis. In
both the intrinsic and extrinsic pathways the regulation of mitochondrial outer
membrane permeabilization (MOMP) is believed to be the key step in committing
the cell to apoptosis.

In the process of intrinsic apoptosis, cell death is triggered by detecting of
cellular stresses (DNA damage, loss of cell-cell contact, etc.) whereas in
extrinsic Apoptosis can be triggered Intrinsic apoptosis can be triggered by
internal detec has identified revealed the Bcl-2 family proteins of both
normal.  Mitochondrial outer membrane permeabilization by the Bcl-2 family of
proteins is believed to be the key rate-limiting step in intrinsic apoptosis
(green, youle). For nearly two decades synthetic lipid vesicles have been used
in the study of pore forming proteins and peptides. They have proven to be a
very useful model system for studying pore formation in apoptosis, and have
helped identify activators and inhibitors of apoptosis, conformational changes
involved in Bcl-2 protein activity, protein-protein interfaces involved in
Bcl-2 protein interaction (cross-linking paper? though that used micelles, not
liposomes), as well as explore the structure of the mitochondrial pore
(satsoura, bleicken, kuwana EM paper).

In these studies, lipid vesicles enclosing a permeabilization marker such as a
fluorescent dye are incubated with one or more Bcl-2 family members

In these studies the kinetics of permeabilization is measured using the
liposome system is

twenty years in the study of pore form

Notes

* Could define narrowly in the context of interpreting dye-release experiments
* Or could frame more generally in the context of understanding pore
  formation kinetics. It is now well-appreciated that interactions between
  the Bcl-2 proteins takes place at membranes. 
  and say that in models of pore forming peptides and
  and proteins, a bulk approximation is used; more over, in models of the
  apoptosis pathway as a whole, the pe

